# Network Security - Assignment 3

1. This question is about IP address spoofing. Write your answers to every subquestion to a file called **exercise1**, making sure to prefix each answer with the letter for that question.
	* a) Take a look at the RFC for the **Internet Protocol**, RFC 791 (https://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc791.txt). Explain what IP address spoofing is, and what a host on the network must do to spoof its IP address.
		* IP spoofing describes the process of altering the header information of an IP packet especially the source addrress. The Internet protocol (IP) is a network protocol operating at layer 3 (network) of the OSI model. It is a connectionless model which means that there is no information regarding transaction state. Additionally, there is no method to ensure that a packet is properly delivered to the destination. By altering the source address field of the ip packets, an attacker can disguise his original ip address and can use this technique for various attack scenarios. There are two main scenarios for IP spoofing: the attacker sits on the same subnet and the attacker sits outside the subnet of his victim. If the attacker sits outside the subnet then most of the time the attack is blind ip spoofing because there is no way to catch reponding ip packets. If the attacker sits inside the same subnet then it is called non-blind ip spoofing. If non-blind ip spoofing is applied then most of the time the machine with the spoofed ip is attacked by some sort of DoS attack, so the attacker can fetch the responding ip packets which were originally meant for the spoofed machine.

	* b) Take a look at the RFC for the **User Datagram Protocol**, RFC 768 (http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc768.txt), and the RFC for **Transmission Control Protocol**, RFC 793 (https://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc793.txt). Explain why an attacker cannot just grab any existing IP packet carrying UDP or TCP, change only the IP addresses in there, and expect the target host to accept the packet. Especially for TCP, don't read the entire RFC but focus on the header (pages 15 - 19)
		* While the Internet protocol (IP) is operating at layer 3 (network) and is responsible for addressing and routing, TCP and UDP operate on layer 4 (transport) and are responsible for reliable transmissions of data segments between points on a network. IP is therefore a wrapper for layer 4 where TCP/UDP are contained in an IP packet's data segment. TCP and UDP incorporate a so called pseudo header. The pseudo header is conceptually prefixed to the UDP or TCP header and contains source address, the destination address, the protocol id and the protocol length. The source and destination address are taken from the ip header. Both UDP and TCP are using the pseudo header and the whole protocol segment to calculate a checksum. If IP spoofing is used with a TCP or UDP protocol within the data segment of the ip packet and the source address in the ip header is changed, then the checksum of the UDP or TCP segment has to be calculated again, otherwise the receiving part will just discard the packet.
		Another problem arises when IP spoofing is used with the TCP protocol. TCP sessions have to build a connection by using the 3-way-handshake beforehand to establish such a valid session by using sequences and acknowledgements. This procedure ensures data reliability because the sender receives an OK from the recipient after each packet exchange. The three-way-handshake is also difficult to establish between a given host and a spoofed ip because most of the time the attacker won't get back any response based on the false ip.
		See also following links for further information:
			* https://www.elektronik-kompendium.de/sites/net/1412101.htm
			* https://www.symantec.com/connect/articles/ip-spoofing-introduction
			* https://www.incapsula.com/ddos/ip-spoofing.html
			* http://www.tcpipguide.com/free/t_TCPChecksumCalculationandtheTCPPseudoHeader-2.htm
			* http://www.inetdaemon.com/tutorials/internet/tcp/3-way_handshake.shtml

	* c) During the lecture we explained SYN flooding attacks. Review that now (slide 10 in https://cryptojedi.org/peter/teaching/netsec2017/tcpip_print.pdf). If an attacker wants to do SYN flooding while IP spoofing, she faces a problem. Let's first consider the case where the attacker, Mallory, tries spoofing the IP of an existing host, Bob, to SYN flood her target, Alice. Using the TCP RFC, explain which packets get sent to whom when Mallory sends a SYN to Alice using Bob's address as source. Focus on the TCP three-way handshake and the Reset Generation in section 3.4, "Establishin a connection". Explain why this will cause the SYN flood attack to fail.
		* The main idea behind the SYN flooding attack is sending many SYN packets to the server and never reply to the server's SYN/ACK with an ACK. This way the server's SYN queue will fill up to the point that new connections can't be established. Let's use the given scenario where Mallory tries to SYN flood Alice by ip spoofing Bob's address. Mallory is sending an initial SYN with a given sequence number X to Alice with the spoofed ip of Bob. Alice answers the initial response with a SYN/ACK with a new sequence number and the acknowledgment of X + 1. The responding SYN/ACK is now flowing to the spoofed ip which belongs to Bob, Mallory therefore does not get the response. Bob receives a SYN/ACK with an acknowledgment number he can't recognize and can't find the corresponding sequence number. Bob therefore sends a RST and forces the connection to close. The allocated memory in the SYN queue of Alice gets free and the SYN flooding attack does not succeed. 

	* d) When Mallory tries to use the address of Ursula, who's currently not on the network, she does no face the problem you uncovered in the previous question. However, there is now another protocol in play which causes the attack to fail. Take a look at the RFC for the **Internet Control Message Protocol** (https://tools.ietf.org/rfc/rfc792.txt). Read the first five pages, and explain which packets get sent to whom when Mallory sends a SYN to Alice using Ursula's address as source. Explain why this will cause the SYN flood attack to fail.
		* Answer

	* e) Using what you've learned in this course so far, describe a way to make Mallory's SYN flood attack succeed against Alice, while IP spoofing using either Bob's or Ursula's address. You may assume that Mallory is in the same network as Alice. If you make any more assumptions (e.g. Mallory is able to modify all traffic on the network) please state these.
		* Answer


2. This question is about port blocking. Write you answer to a file called **exercise2**. As a network security measure, some network administrators attempt to restrict what external serviced their users can access by blocking any outgoing connection made to all but a few well-known ports. This by itself is not a very effective measure, since it will inconvenience normal users, but it will do nothing to stop somebody in control of the external endpoint. Consider you are such a person. You know that soon you will be on a network that blocks every outgoing connection except on port 53 (DNS), 80 (HTTP), and 443 (HTTPS). What could you do to be able to access the SSH service on your external server once you are inside this network?
	* Answer

3. This exercise has you using nmap. Write your answers to separate files in a folder called **exercise3**. So for exercise 3a you should use **exercise3/exercise3a**, etc. Not that you will need root rights to execute many of the scan types nmap provides, since they use raw sockets. Connect to the homework network. You should have recovered the key in the previous exercise. If you connect using a static IP, use an IP address in the range 192.168.84.200-249. Net netmask is /24, or 255.255.255.0. The network will be present at the werkcollege, and at other times it will be reachable from the central common area on the ground floor of the Mercator 1 building. Not that some of you will be scanning each other if you're performing this exercise at the same time. This is fine. Portscans are not harmful. However, do not attack each other.

	* a) Read the manual page section on **host discovery**. Your first task is to map the network. Discover all the active hosts, and write your results to **exercise3a**. Also explain how you discovered them.Since you're scanning on a wireless network, the scan appear to be not as reliable as on a wired network. Furthermore, you're not supposed to spend hours waiting on scans to complete. Read the manual page section on timing and performance. Try to play with a higher timing template (-T), different max-retries or host-timeout, and other stuff, if hosts seem to intermittently drop from the network, or if scans take too long.
		* Answer

	* b) Read the manual page section on **OS detection**. You should have found a lot of active hosts in the range 192.168.84.1-99. However, as you should have concluded from the previous assignment, many of these hosts are the same machine with different IP addresses. Try to detect the Operating Systems running on a few hosts you found in the reanges 192.168.84.1-9, 192.168.84.10-19, 192.168.84.20-59 and 192.168.84.60-99. If there is more than one active host in a range, pick (at least) two from the range; however don't bother scanning them all. Write you results to **exercise3b**, and explain how you got them
		* Answer

	* c) Read the section on **port scanning basics**, **port scanning techniques**, and **port specification** and **scan order**. Scan for open ports on the same hosts you scanned in **3b**. Write your results to **exercise3c**, and explain your scanning techniques.
		* Answer

	* d) Read the section on **service and version detection**. Try to detect what services are running on what ports for the same hosts you scanned in 3b and 3c. List these results in **exercise3d**. Also mention which of these services are running on non-standard ports. If nmap is unable to determine what a service is, make a guess based on its port number. A list of standard ports is often available on Linux machines in /etc/services, and can also be found at the Internet Assigned NUmbers Authority (IANA) (http://www.iana.org/assignments/service-names-port-numbers/service-names-port-numbers.xhtml).
		* Answer

	* e) (OPTIONAL) If you were an attacker, intent on gaining access to one of these machines, which service would you attack first, and why? Write you answer to **exercise3e**.
		* Answer

4. Don't forget exercise 4 from assignment 2. Use the folder **exercise4** for that.						

